#415 Neural clustering paint tool for Houdini docs (#416)
Inbibo/adonisfx_docs: docs/houdini/tools/neural_clustering_paint_tool.md

# AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool

The **AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool** is used to paint neural clusters on a static mesh. These clusters provide additional locality information for the machine learning training process, helping the model better isolate local deformations and activations.

> Neural clusters define local regions on the training mesh. These regions help the training process understand which parts of the mesh should be treated as related deformation areas, which can improve the poseability of the trained rig.

Author: Done!

The number and size of the clusters should be adjusted depending on the amount of extracted training data available. Larger datasets can support more granular clusters, while smaller datasets should usually use broader cluster regions.

If multiple clusters overlap, the cluster values can be normalized. Normalizing overlapping clusters helps keep the cluster data consistent and can improve the resulting training quality.

> [!NOTE]

> > The **AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool** is intended to be used as an optional data preparation step for machine learning workflows. It provides neural clustering information that can complement the data extracted through the [AdnMLDataExtraction TOP HDA](../tools/data_extraction_tool).

Author: Done!

- `mesh`: Source mesh name used for painting, export, and import.
- `entries`: List of neural cluster entries.

Each entry contains:

- `name`: Cluster entry name. This corresponds to the neural cluster attribute used by the tool.
- `joints`: Full joint paths associated with the cluster.
- `vertex_indices`: Stored vertex index data for the entry.
- `color_set`: Name of the color set used to store the painted values.
- `weights`: Painted cluster weight values, stored by mesh component index.

For example, a cluster file may contain entries such as `R_frontLeg`, `L_frontLeg`, `R_rearLeg`, `L_rearLeg`, and `C_tailSpineNeck`. Each entry stores the joints associated with that region and the painted weight values for the mesh.

> [!NOTE]
> The exported cluster data is intended to be reusable across DCCs. For this reason, the mesh name, cluster names, and joint naming conventions should be kept consistent with the equivalent setup in other DCCs.

## Result

After configuring and painting clusters with the AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool, the mesh contains neural clustering information that can be used as additional data during the machine learning training process.

> The generated clusters describe regions of locality on the mesh. These regions help the training process isolate local deformation and activation behavior, which can improve the poseability of the trained rig.

Author: Done!

    *Clear Imported Data* is also used to clear mirrored data because the same internal stash is used for import and mirror operations.

5. Configure the mirror naming convention.

    Use *Mirror by* to define how the left and right text is matched in cluster names and joint names.

    Use *Prefix* when the left and right text appears at the start of the name, for example `L_forearm` and `R_forearm`.

    Use *Suffix* when the left and right text appears at the end of the name, for example `forearm_L` and `forearm_R`.

    Use *Token* when the left and right text can appear anywhere in the name, for example `front_L_forearm` and `front_R_forearm`.

    Use *Left* and *Right* to define the side-specific naming convention. For example, use `L_` and `R_` for prefix names, `_L` and `_R` for suffix names, or `_L_` and `_R_` for token-based names.

    The mirror naming convention is used for both the cluster entry name and the joint names.

6. Create or select a cluster entry.

    Use *Entry* to select the cluster entry to edit. Each entry represents a neural cluster definition.

    Use the plus and minus icons next to *Entry* to add or remove cluster entries.

>     Use *Clear* to clear the current multiparameter entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Use *Clear* to clear all of the current multiparameter entries.
```

Author: Done

  ![AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool painted cluster](../images/neural_clustering_paint_tool_cluster.png)
  <figcaption><b>Figure 4</b>: Example of a painted neural cluster on a training mesh. Painted values closer to <code>1</code> are displayed toward red and represent higher influence, while values closer to <code>0</code> are displayed toward blue and represent lower influence. Smooth transitions between these values define the cluster falloff.</figcaption>
</figure>

10. Mirror the cluster if needed.

    Press *Mirror* to create or update a mirrored neural cluster entry by copying joints and weights across the X axis.

    Mirroring is useful when one side of the character has already been configured and the opposite side should use corresponding joints and mirrored weight values.

    The entry name and joints are mirrored using the selected *Mirror by* mode and the *Left* and *Right* naming tokens. The same naming convention is used for both the cluster entry name and the joint names.

    The painted weights are mirrored across the X axis of the geometry. This means the tool transfers the painted region from one side of the mesh to the corresponding opposite-side region.

>     If the selected convention does not match, the tool may fall back to a simple `L`/`R` token swap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the selected convention does not match, the tool will try to fall back to a simple `L`/`R` token swap. A warning will be logged in case of failure.
```

Author: Done

>     If the mirrored entry already exists, the tool asks for confirmation. Depending on which data is already present, it may mirror only the joints, only the weights, or both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the mirrored entry already exists, the tool asks for confirmation. Depending on which data is already present, it may update only the mirrored joints, the weights, or both.
```

Author: Done

11. Normalize overlapping clusters if needed.

    Enable *Normalize Clusters* when cluster regions overlap and the painted values should be normalized.

>     Normalizing clusters adjusts the weights between `0` and `1` across all clusters. This helps keep overlapping cluster data consistent and can improve the quality of the resulting training data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Normalizing clusters adjusts the weights between `0` and `1` across all clusters. This helps keep overlapping cluster data consistent and can improve the quality of the model predictions at the interface between clusters.
```

Author: Done

| *Import JSON* | Button |  | Imports neural cluster entry data from a `.json` file. This replaces the current entries in the tool with the entries from the file and stashes the imported cluster attributes internally on the node. |
| *Clear Imported Data* | Button |  | Clears imported and mirrored weight values from the internal stash. Cluster entries and painted weights remain unchanged. |

### Mirror

| Name | Type | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :------ | :---------- |
| *Mirror by* | Menu | Prefix | Defines how the left and right text is matched in cluster names and joint names. Use *Prefix* when the text is at the start, *Suffix* when it is at the end, or *Token* when it can appear anywhere in the name. |
| *Left* | String | L_ | Left-side naming convention used for mirrored cluster names and joints. For example, use `L_` for prefix, `_L` for suffix, or `_L_` for token. |
| *Right* | String | R_ | Right-side naming convention used for mirrored cluster names and joints. For example, use `R_` for prefix, `_R` for suffix, or `_R_` for token. |

### Cluster Entry

| Name | Type | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :------ | :---------- |

> | *Entry* | Integer | 1 | Current cluster entry being edited. Use the plus and minus icons to add or remove entries, and use *Clear* to clear the current multiparameter entry. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Entry* | Integer | 1 | Current cluster entry being edited. Use the plus and minus icons to add or remove entries, and use *Clear* to clear all of the current multiparameter entries. |
```

Author: Done

| *Name* | String | Entry1 | Neural cluster name. This becomes the Houdini point attribute used for painting, import, export, mirroring, and normalization. Use a valid attribute name with no spaces or special characters. |
| *Joints* | String |  | Explicit joint selection for the current cluster entry, stored as Houdini group patterns using the `@name=...` convention. The joint geometry must contain a valid *name* point attribute. Do not use wildcards or broad patterns. On export, these selections are resolved to full joint paths using separators. |
| *Paint Cluster* | Button |  | Makes this cluster the active paint target and enters the paint workflow for its mask attribute. |

> | *Mirror* | Button |  | Creates or updates a mirrored neural cluster entry by copying joints and weights across the X axis. The entry name and joints are mirrored using the selected *Mirror by* mode and the *Left* and *Right* naming tokens. If the selected convention does not match, the tool may fall back to a simple `L`/`R` token swap. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Mirror* | Button |  | Creates or updates a mirrored neural cluster entry by copying joints and weights across the X axis. The entry name and joints are mirrored using the selected *Mirror by* mode and the *Left* and *Right* naming tokens. If the selected convention does not match, the tool will try to fall back to a simple `L`/`R` token swap. A warning will be logged in case of failure. |
```

Author: Done

| *Normalize Clusters* | Boolean | False | Normalizes the weights between `0` and `1` across all clusters. This helps keep overlapping cluster weights consistent. |

### Paint Settings

The *Paint Settings* section exposes the same painting parameters available in Houdini's Attribute Paint node. These parameters control the brush behavior, stroke behavior, symmetry, and paint values used while painting cluster regions.

For more information about these parameters, refer to the [Houdini Attribute Paint documentation](https://www.sidefx.com/docs/houdini/nodes/sop/attribpaint).

## Cluster JSON Overview

The exported JSON file stores the mesh name and the list of neural cluster entries.

At the top level, the file contains:

- `mesh`: Source mesh name used for painting, export, import, and cross-DCC compatibility.
- `entries`: List of neural cluster entries.

Each entry contains:

- `name`: Cluster entry name. This corresponds to the neural cluster attribute used by the tool.

> - `joints`: Full joint paths associated with the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `joints`: List of full joint paths associated with the cluster.
```

Author: Done

- `vertex_indices`: Stored vertex index data for the entry.

> - `color_set`: Name of the color set used to store the painted values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `color_set`: Name of the color set used to store the painted values. This is a Maya specific parameter and will be auto-generated for cross-DCC compatibility.
```

Author: Done

> [!NOTE]
> The exported cluster data is intended to be reusable across DCCs. For this reason, the mesh name, cluster names, and joint naming conventions should be kept consistent with the equivalent setup in other DCCs.

## Result

After configuring and painting clusters with the AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool, the painted neural clustering data can be exported to a `.json` file.

This `.json` file is used during neural training and can be provided when launching the training process with the [AdnNeuralTrainingTool](../tools/neural_training_tool).

The generated clusters describe regions of locality on the mesh. These regions help the training process isolate local deformation and activation behavior, which can improve the posability of the trained rig.

## Recommendations

- Use broader cluster regions when the extracted training dataset contains fewer samples.
- Use more granular clusters only when enough training samples are available to support them.
- Paint clusters around regions where local deformation behavior should be isolated.
- Normalize clusters when painted regions overlap.
- Use clear cluster names that describe the body region or deformation area they represent.

> - Associate each cluster with the joints that most directly affect the painted region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Associate each cluster with the joints that are expected to cause deformations in that region. For example for a humanoid character, movements of the elbow (forearm) joint are expected to cause bulging of the bicep/tricep muscles, therefore the cluster should cover that skin region.
```

Author: Done

# AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool

The **AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool** is used to paint neural clusters on a static mesh. These clusters provide additional locality information for the machine learning training process, helping the model better isolate local deformations and activations.

The tool exports the painted cluster data to a `.json` file. This file is later used during neural training and can be provided when launching the training process with the [AdnNeuralTrainingTool](../tools/neural_training_tool).

Neural clusters define local regions on the training mesh. These regions help the training process understand which parts of the mesh should be treated as related deformation areas, which can improve the posability of the trained rig.

The number and size of the clusters should be adjusted depending on the amount of extracted training data available. Larger datasets can support more granular clusters, while smaller datasets should usually use broader cluster regions.

If multiple clusters overlap, the cluster values can be normalized. Normalizing overlapping clusters helps keep the cluster data consistent and can improve the resulting training quality.

> [!NOTE]

> > Neural clustering is only supported with the **AdonisML** bundle. Make sure the Adonis plugin is installed and licensed to support ML before using this workflow.

Reviewer 2: remind to remove this one and add the IMPORTANT note at the top

Author: Done

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
```

Author: Done

The generated clusters describe regions of locality on the mesh. These regions help the training process isolate local deformation and activation behavior, which can improve the posability of the trained rig.

## Recommendations

- Use broader cluster regions when the extracted training dataset contains fewer samples.
- Use more granular clusters only when enough training samples are available to support them.
- Paint clusters around regions where local deformation behavior should be isolated.
- Normalize clusters when painted regions overlap.
- Use clear cluster names that describe the body region or deformation area they represent.
- Associate each cluster with the joints that most directly affect the painted region.
- Keep mesh and cluster names aligned with other DCCs when the cluster data needs to be reused across applications.
- Use explicit `@name=...` joint selections and avoid wildcards.
- Remember that painted values closer to `1` represent higher influence and are displayed toward red, while values closer to `0` represent lower influence and are displayed toward blue.

## Limitations

> - Neural clustering quality depends on the quality and amount of extracted training data.

Reviewer 2: Same as in other PRs, I think these are not limitations of the tool functionality

Author: Done
